[applause and cheering]
[applause]
Thank you very much. It is good to be
here. I don't know if you people realize
what a beautiful campus you have and how
you basically just study in heaven.
Today I want to talk with you about what
I think is one of the most
underappreciated formulas. Not because
those who know it don't appreciate it,
but because not enough people know about
this and more importantly, not enough
people understand where it comes from.
And this should be one of the gems. This
should be the e to the pi eye of the
mathematical community. But I really
want you to come away knowing not just
what it is uh but why it's true and what
it represents. Now before I dive
straight into it, I think the scene is
best set if we start with two different
puzzles. Okay. The first puzzle is just
going to give us a sense of the meaning
of what we're about to do because it
runs the risk of feeling pretty
abstract. And then the second puzzle is
going to be a kind of forewarning uh not
to trust our intuitions. So, let's start
with the first puzzle. This is our
warm-up for today. We're going to start
by imagining that there's a random
number. I'm going to call it X. It's
going to sit between negative 1,
positive 1, chosen uniformly. X is going
to have a friend. Another random number
Y chosen between negative 1 and positive
1 uniformly. And we're going to ask a
question, a probability question about
both of these, which is what's the
probability that if you square X and
then you add it to the square of Y, you
end up with something which is less than
or equal to one. So, let me throw this
out to the audience. Does anyone want to
raise their hand and uh throw out
probability that you choose this random
X, choose this random Y, you add their
squares, it's going to be less than one.
Let's see. So, I see a blue shirt up
here. Yeah. Do you want to pass it out?
>> Um, I mean x^2 + y^2 makes like a unit
circle. So, my guess would be it be
related to the area of a unit circle
over the area of like a unit square.
>> Amazing. So I asked this question and
immediately in your mind there's an
image that pops up. And the point I want
to make is this is an analytical
question. This is just a question about
two numbers. If you're savvy with your
probability, you could set up some
integrals not thinking about geometry
and answer the question, but that would
feel a little bit like a crime. The
question is kind of screaming out at you
that it wants to be a picture. The
natural way that this wants to be
answered is to think of that pair of
numbers x and y as a point in a
two-dimensional space. And that way when
you're thinking of a random choice for x
independent from a random choice of y,
you're choosing a random point inside.
Well, in this case, it's a square that
goes from x=1 to positive 1. Same with
y. So it's a 2x2 square. Now the reason
it's screaming out to be geometric is
because this constraint of x^2 + y^2
being less than equal to 1 is the
meaning of being inside a circle, right?
It's saying if x^2 + y^2 um is equal to
1, that would actually land you on the
boundary. This follows straight from the
Pythagorean theorem. You can draw a nice
little right triangle. X gives you one
leg. Y gives you the other leg. And you
end up answering in this case area of
that circle divided by area of the
square. All you need to know is the area
of a circle. P<unk> R^ square. This is
one of those formulas we learn in high
school. So you can write down pi / 4.
All well and good. And we could bump it
up. I could say, what if instead of
choosing two random numbers X and Y,
they had a third friend Z. Same deal.
Uniform between negative 1 and 1. You
square it. You want to ask the
probability that the sum of all those
numbers is less than or equal to one. In
your mind's eye, it's screaming to you,
hey, I want to be a three-dimensional
picture. Now, it doesn't have to be. You
could answer it purely analytically, but
it would somehow feel wrong not to turn
this into a threedimensional picture
because in this case, that constraint of
x^2 + y^2 + z^2 being less than 1 means
sitting inside of a unit sphere. And so
in this case, to answer the probability
question, you just need to know what's
the volume of that unit sphere as it
compares to the volume of this 2x2x2
cube. This is another one of those
formulas we might have learned in middle
school or high school. Volume of a
sphere ends up being 4/3 pi * its radius
squared. Radius in this case is one. You
work it all out and you get, I guess, a
little above 50%.
Now, there's no reason that we'd have to
stop there, right? This is three
numbers, but what if I asked about four
numbers? Now, at this point, your mind's
eye is going to start kind of squinking
a little bit because it's like, I know
what I want to be seeing right now. In
the same way that the first problem
screamed out that it wants you to be
thinking about a circle, this one wants
you to be thinking about whatever the
four-dimensional equivalent of circles
and spheres should be. But again, it's a
perfectly reasonable question. It's a
very empirical question. It's very real.
And I don't have to stop there. We could
say what if you had a hundred different
numbers you add up all their squares and
I want to know the probability that they
add up to be something less than one. To
ask that question is to kind of force
yourself to want to know the volume of a
100dimensional unit ball. Now that might
seem kind of weird like if you just
heard a mathematician off the street
saying that they found some formula for
the volumes of highdimensional balls.
That risks sounding like something which
is just nonsense, right? It's so
divorced from reality because we're used
to living in three dimensions. But the
point I want to make is that higher
dimensional geometry is real. Just
because it's not describing a literal
physical space doesn't mean that it
doesn't have a kind of utility. Now it
probably doesn't need to be emphasized
nowadays because um machine learning is
a wash in high dimensional geometry.
Essentially anytime that you're
representing something with a long list
of numbers, you could choose to
interpret that as a point in a
highdimensional space. And one of the
big lessons of geometry is that that's a
fruitful choice to make. It helps your
problem solving. It makes certain things
that would have been really hard, like
setting up a hundred different integrals
for this probability question, turn into
something easier. I don't think I need
to emphasize this to you because these
days we have things like large language
models. And if you dig under the hood
and you say, "What's really going on?"
When you interact with, you know, chatbt
or claude or Gemini or whichever one
your favorite one is, the under the hood
scheme basically looks like breaking up
all of your text into little chunks. And
each of those chunks gets turned into a
long long list of numbers. And you don't
have to think about that as a point in
high dimensional space. You could just
say, "Oh, it's this big big long list of
numbers." But to try to understand what
these models are doing, it ends up being
really fruitful to think about those
long lists of numbers that the words
turn into as being points in a space.
When people do research to interpret
these things, all of their language is
centered around talking about points in
some kind of highdimensional space.
That's all to say high dimensions are
useful. But this is a little bit of a
problem because higherdimensional
geometry can get very counterintuitive.
And the second puzzle here is just an
absolute classic. This is one of those
things where I think everybody sometime,
you know, if they're entering a STEM
field going into college, they should
see this example at some point as a kind
of like ASOPs fable of something you
might want to avoid. So here's going to
be the setup. We're again going to have
a 2x2 square centered at the origin.
Goes from x=1 to y= pos1. I'm going to
put a circle at each one of its corners.
So the corners are sitting at 1 one
negative 1 one negative 1 negative 1 on
and on. I'm going to put a unit circle
on each one of those. And so by
definition those corner circles have a
radius of one. And the question I'm
going to ask here is to say what if I
was to give them another friend, a
circle that sits on the inside that gets
as big as it can to be tangent to all of
them on the outside. What's the radius
of that inner circle? Just a geometry
question. Just a little puzzle. We're
still in the warm-up phase. Again,
anyone want to raise their hand and kind
of toss out a proposed answer here? All
right, we got a raised hand over here.
>> You can take a look at the diagonal,
calculate the length Pythagoras, and
then subtract from that the R twice.
>> Love it. So, we're going to look at the
diagonal from the origin to the corner
of that cube. And that looks like square
root of well, in this case, the legs are
1 and 1. So, square root of 1 2 + 1 2
that distance is square<unk> of two. And
then we're going to subtract off the
radius of that outer circle. Right?
Subtract off the one that was by
definition radius 1. So the answer
square<unk> of 2 minus one. You work it
out. It's about 0.4. You look at the
picture. You say, "I don't know. Seems
reasonable. Why is this an interesting
question?" I say, "Wait, wait, wait.
You'll see. You'll see." So then you go
to three dimensions, and we're going to
do the same setup. We're going to have a
unit ball on each one of the corners. So
in this case, we're going to have not
four, but eight different unit spheres.
Each one of them has a radius one.
They're sitting on all of the corners.
And we're going to play the same game. I
say, introduce a new sphere centered at
the origin that is as big as it can be,
meaning it gets as big as it needs to be
to be tangent to those eight outer
spheres. Same question. What is the
radius of that inner sphere? In this
case, anybody want to raise their hands,
toss out a proposed answer to the radius
of this one up close.
>> Roo<unk>3 - 1.
>> Roo<unk>3 minus one. Okay. So, so you
you say root3 because you understand
Pythagorean theorem in three dimensions.
I might belabor the point here. Uh,
forgive me if this is telling you
something I already know. I really want
to emphasize why the distance rule is
what it is because the result I'm about
to get to is so counterintuitive that
when I've put it online before, there
have been comments to the effect of
maybe distance in higher dimensions just
doesn't work the way that we think it
does. Um, what I want to emphasize is
everything's just stemming from the rule
in two dimensions. So if you have a unit
cube, you can play the same
two-dimensional Pythagorean theorem game
because having that diagonal of one
square, that could be one leg of a new
right triangle where another leg is this
zaxis. And then from there you do the
normal two-dimensional Pythagorean
theorem. So we're not imbuing 3D space
with a new rule. It's more like it's
inheriting the rule from all its
two-dimensional subspaces. You work it
out, you end up with roo<unk>3. So in
this case, that means the final answer
roo<unk>3 minus 1. Again, you do the
calculation. Looks to be about 0.7. You
say, "Seems reasonable. Why is this
interesting?" But let's just keep upping
it up in four dimensions. I don't know
how to [clears throat] draw a
four-dimensional cube. This is my best
attempt. It's something that would look
like a cube, but it's got another cube
as the top cap and some lines connecting
the vertices. But we know how to
calculate the distance. The exact same
logic is going to let us go up one more
where you would be drawing a
two-dimensional right triangle where one
leg is that root three. That's the
diagonal of a unit cube. and then you
just step up in some fourth direction.
Now, this one's kind of cute because the
distance to the corner is um square root
of four, which means it's a whole
number. It's two. And in this case,
whatever that diagram should look like
in four dimensions. It's got 16
different corners, 16 different unit
balls. One thing that's really nice
about four dimensions is that a unit
ball fits nice and snugly right in the
middle of them. So, this gives you a
little instinct for what sphere packing
in four dimensions can look like. Now,
where this gets more interesting is if
we think in generality. If we say okay,
not just for three or four dimensions,
but for n dimensions, what would this
look like? The distance to the corner of
that cube, it's going to look like
roo<unk> of n. We're always subtracting
off the radius of that corner sphere,
which is by definition 1. So, for
example, up in 10 dimensions, it looks
like <unk>10 - 1, which is about 2.16.
Now, if you just look at that and you
kind of nod along with the formulas, you
might say, okay, seems reasonable. I
guess that's what things would be. But
it gets really really weird when you try
to interpret it geometrically and
physically because here's what I'm going
to do. I'm going to draw a new box
outside of the entire diagram that we
had. So before we introduce that center
circle, I'm going to draw this 4x4x4
bounding box outside of everything. And
if in two dimensions I said, "Notice
that inner circle is inside all of
those." Or in three dimensions the inner
sphere is inside of that whole bounding
box, you'd say, "Yeah, obviously." Like
it seems like by definition it must be
inside of it. But the weird part is the
distance from your origin to the edge of
that bounding box because it's 4x4 ends
up being two to get to that edge. So if
we're saying up in 10 dimensions,
whatever this diagram should look like
with its 2 to the 10th different
corners, whole bunch of little unit
balls up there expanding some sort of
inner sphere, that inner sphere is
actually dramatically bigger than all
your corner spheres. It's even bigger
than that bounding box. It pokes outside
the bounding box. Now, that's just
bizarre. And it's so bizarre. Um there's
this this common phrase that I've heard
from other people who have described
this problem where they say uh this
suggests that higher dimensional spheres
are very spiky. I don't know if anyone's
heard this intuition would say you know
high dimensional spheres are spiky. I
hate this
because like they're not they're they're
very round. They're round because they
are defined to be round. What is a
sphere in a high number of dimensions?
It's all of the points that are a given
distance from the origin. So it is as
round as round could be. Spheres are not
the problem. This is counterintuitive,
but spheres, they're fine. Do you know
who's the problem? It's the cubes. Cubes
are messed up in higher dimensions. At
the very least, they defy our intuition.
Cuz what's really going on with this
example is we've got this very
highdimensional cube where to get from
the origin to the edge of it, that point
that a highdimensional sphere on the
inside could bounce outside of, let's
say this is a 2x two box, it's just
going to be a distance one to get to the
edge of that 2x2 box. But to get to the
corner, that's actually a lot longer
because up in 10 dimensions, to get to
that corner, you've got to walk in your
first dimension, then your second
dimension, then your third dimension,
then your fourth dimension, then your
sixth, on and on and on 10 times. Now,
even if you're not taking perpendicular
steps and you take the shortcut to just
go straight across, you know, the
shortcut can only get you so much. Um,
so it gets you a square root speed up,
but not not anything better than that.
So the very loose schematic picture I
have in my head for highdimensional
cubes and take this with a grain of salt
is it's something like this where your
corners are just way way way farther
away than the edge. Okay, again grain of
salt because it's not like their their
uh sides are curved but just cram this
intuition into two dimensions that
that's what we have to do. So for this
example, if we're thinking what's going
on when we put those unit spheres on the
corners, those unit spheres are just way
far away. They're just way off there.
Um, so when we have that inside one
that's growing as big as it needs to be
to be tangent to all of those, it's got
to get massive. Now, this picture is
also still not quite right because I'm
cramming it into two dimensions and I'm
only showing four corners, but there's
many, many, many corners. There's two to
the end different corners. So, the like
new loose schematic that you might have
for this is something where rather than
just those four corners, you have a
whole bunch of corners. So, very vaguely
speaking, like this is the picture to
have in your mind for what's going on
with that example. So that the inner
sphere does bust out um but in some
sense it's still contained by all of
those corners. So this is all to say
highdimensional geometry for all of its
utility is unfortunately very
counterintuitive. And I think maybe the
better way of framing is that it it
risks being counterintuitive because I
think if you find the right ways to
think about these shapes they actually
can become your friends. And this is
what brings us to the real me. The real
reason we're all here. I don't want to
talk about how it's real and useful. I
don't even want to talk about how it's
counterintuitive. I want to talk about
something that's just completely
beautiful about higher dimensional
spheres specifically. And this is that
formula that I referenced. What it's
going to describe is the volume of a
ball up in a higher number of
dimensions. You can focus on a ball with
radius one, but um just add an r to the
end there if you want. So, we're going
to build up to this. We're going to talk
about where it comes from. I want it to
feel like it's deep in your bones,
something that you you really felt like
you could have discovered it yourself.
Um, and in order to get up there, I
think it's worth just spending some time
with the familiar friends that we have,
which are the relevant formulas you
might have come across already in
school. And so there there's four main
ones here. You've got the circumference
of a circle. So this is kind of
measuring the boundary in two
dimensions. And this is 2 pi time the
radius. This is basically the definition
of pi. So after here, everything is a
derivation, but this one you could call
kind of a definition. Um, this is this
is what the constant pi even means. Now
below it I'm going to draw p<unk> r^ squ
that's the measuring the interior of the
square. So still in two dimensions
interior our good old friend p<unk> r^
squ up in three dimensions the boundary
that surface area looks like 4 pi r^ 2
very fun very suspicious because it's
exactly four times the circle so that
might be worth revisiting and then the
interior uh the the volume of a sphere
is 4/3 pi r cubed. So these are the ones
we might have seen them inside a chart
and our goal today is basically to fill
out this chart. So the way I'm I'm
orchestrating this, I'm going to label
that bottom row BN, meaning a ball in N
dimensions. So for example, a ball in
two dimensions, that's a filledin
circle. A ball in three dimensions,
that's the thing we would usually call a
ball, but we're going to use this as a
very general term across all the
dimensions. And then above that, I'm
going to label things with uh this
little dell symbol that you often use to
mean partial. So this is just a bit of
notation. In this case, it doesn't mean
partial, it actually means the boundary.
So the boundary of a ball in n
dimensions. So the boundary of a ball in
two dimensions, that's the circle. In
three dimensions, it's the shell of the
sphere. Now that notation that kind of
looks like a little d kind of gives some
calculus vibes, I actually think is
helpful for an important rule about this
chart. I want you to think a little bit
because I know all of you have probably
had some kind of exposure to calculus in
your background. I want you to think
about the relationship between the the
bottom row and the top row. And again,
I'm going to just throw this out. Anyone
want to raise their hands and kind of
say what is the relationship? So, right
over here. Yeah.
>> It's a derivative, right? How many of
you like thought this was very fun the
first time? I don't know, maybe this is
the first time you've seen it. The first
time I saw this, I remember thinking
that's weird. Why is that true? I was
but a little calculus student who maybe
had didn't have a deep enough intuition
for what the whole field was. But
there's a very good reason this is true
in terms of the the meaning of a
derivative. So if you think of what
would it mean to take the derivative of
the area formula, you're kind of saying,
well, suppose you were to increase that
radius of a circle by a little amount,
some little dr. How much has that area
changed? What is the resulting change to
that area that we might call da? And
what this is saying is approximately
it's about the circumference of that
circle times that little dr. Now, this
is wrong if you interpret dr and da as
literal amounts, uh, some kind of actual
tiny nudge like a physicist. But the
idea is that it becomes less wrong if
you let that VR get smaller and smaller.
I'm a fan of the physicist perspective.
I don't mean that in a derogatory way.
Actually thinks the way we should all
teach it. But uh the the the technical
meaning of this would be this is not
actually an equation. It's something
that becomes less and less wrong as you
let that little dr um approach something
close to zero or approach zero rather.
And then same intuition the other way
around is basically saying you could
think of the interior of the circle as
kind of integrating together a whole
bunch of boundaries. And when you
integrate all of those uh boundaries
that grow proportionally to r, taking
that integral looks like turning the r
into r squ and dividing by two. That
division is going to be very important
for us. So remember it. Same deal in
three dimensions. Just to just to state
it all, you've got a ball. If you were
looking at its volume and you want to
know what's the rate of change of its
volume. A really nice way to think about
that is that it is based on the surface
area of that sphere. You're saying what
is the tiny change in volume caused by a
tiny change to the radius? Well, it's
about the area of that shell times the
thickness that you've given it. Now,
that's wrong as stated with a literal
number that you plug in for little dr,
but it come becomes less wrong if you
let dr shrink and shrink and shrink
closer to zero. And then on the flip
side too, you could think of it by
integrating together a bunch of shells
and integrating the r 2 turns into 1/3 r
cubed. And that 1/3 is important. That
idea that integration gives us that
division is going to matter a lot. So we
know how to go up and down in this
diagram. That's the important part. If
you know something on the bottom row,
you can step up. Now our real question
is how do we go left and right? Right?
And before we go in the interesting
direction to all the higher dimensions,
let's give a little love to the first
dimension because we do a lot of
two-dimensional geometry. We do a lot of
threedimensional geometry.
One-dimensional geometry always kind of
gets the short drift. And maybe it's
because it's a little less fun. But take
a moment and think, what should the
volume of the interior of a
one-dimensional ball be? Anyone want to
want to hazard an answer? What should
the the formula be for onedimensional
ball? Yeah. Here.
>> Would it just be a constant because it's
kind of like a line? Well, it's going to
>> it [clears throat] is a line, but it's
not going to be constant because we want
to think of uh with respect to a radius.
So, as you increase that radius,
>> 2 * r.
>> Yeah, exactly. 2 * r. So, we say what is
a ball in one dimension? Well, it's all
the points with in a distance r from
some center point that ends up looking
like a line. And in the same way that in
two dimensions, the way that we're
measuring like volume is with area. In
three dimensions, it's our normal
meaning of volume. down here. What I
mean by the volume of a one-dimensional
ball using this word volume in a general
sense across all the dimensions would
just be the length. And the length is 2
R. And what's fun here is if we just try
to blindly follow the rule of taking a
derivative to get up top, we end up with
the idea that the volume of the boundary
of a one-dimensional ball is two, which
at first seems weird because what's the
boundary of a one-dimensional ball? But
you think about it, you say, well, it's
just two different points. And what
should zero dimensional volume be? I
guess just counting those points seems
as reasonable as anything, but it
follows the pattern. So that gives us a
little reassurance and that'll be a
general theme as we move forward here.
Something that seems a little suspicious
at first, but that follows the pattern
kind of gives us a comfortable feeling
in our hearts. Now, of course, I know
you want to see how we move to the
right, how do we get into those higher
dimensions? But to get a running start
at it, I want to linger a little bit on
where exactly those three-dimensional
formulas are coming from. because the
logic that gets us an understanding of,
for example, the surface area of a
sphere is going to actually carry us
even farther if we think about it the
right way. So, I alluded to the fact
that a sphere is kind of suspicious
because it's got this area that's
exactly four times the area of a circle.
That may make you wonder like where does
it come from? Why do we get such a nice
formula? And there's a really lovely way
of thinking about this surface area that
dates a long time back. It goes all the
way back to Archimedes. And he had this
very clever idea which was to say we can
think about the area of the surface of a
sphere by imagining taking all these
little patches on it and projecting them
out onto a cylinder that encloses that
sphere. Now you might think this act of
projecting and kind of warping it is
going to be such a a violent affair that
it changes the area. Of course it should
change the area. But Archimedes very
cleverly pointed out that if you think
of one little rectangle of area on that
sphere and you imagine what happens as
you project it out onto that cylinder,
there are two competing effects. It
doesn't end up the same, but what
happens is it gets stretched out in one
direction, but then because it's kind of
casting a shadow of something at an
angle, it effectively gets squished down
in another direction. And those two
effects actually cancel each other out
perfectly. And it's not too hard to
reason about why either. So let's think
about one of them. We're going to slice
open the sphere. We're going to put some
some names to things. Let's say the
radius of the whole sphere is capital R.
And then the distance between the Z-axis
and our specific choice of a little
rectangle. I'm going to call that little
D.
How much does it get stretched out, say
on the bottom in terms of capital R and
little D. And here you can draw two
different similar triangles. We could
think of the triangle that's isoclesles
and has a tip on that Z-axis point and
its base is the original base of that
little rectangle. And then you say,
think of a new triangle whose base is
the projected version of that little
rectangle that was on the sphere. And
when you project it out, you're going to
get a similar triangle. And because
they're similar, the ratios of all of
their sides should be the same. So in
particular, we know the ratio of the
long sides of those isles triangles is
going to be capital R to D. So that
should also be the ratio of that little
side. Meaning that's the factor by which
it gets stretched out in that direction
when we project. Now what about the
other way? This competing factor. What's
going on there is you kind of think
about casting a shadow. So the height of
that rectangle looks like this diagonal
line here and then it gets projected
down onto something that is
perpendicular to the direction of
projection. So how much how much does
that get scaled? What's that factor?
Well, you can do a nice little um angle
chasing argument to point out that this
little blue right triangle that I've
drawn showing us that projection factor
is actually similar to this brown right
triangle which again has the side
lengths little d and then a hypotenuse
r. So finding that it's just kind of
chase some angles, see what has to be
equal, and you end up deducing that
these have to be the same. And what that
ends up telling you is the factor by
which it gets squished down in the other
direction is that same r / d. So when
you do this to all of your little
rectangles, each one of them is getting
stretched in one direction, squished in
another. But the idea is that it's area
preserving. And because it's area
preserving, we just have to ask the area
of the cylinder, which is a lot easier
because with a cylinder, you can just
unwrap it. You can basically imagine,
you know, slicing it like a piece of
paper, unwrapping it, and you get a
rectangle where one edge of that
rectangle came from the circumference of
that sphere, which would be 2 pi r. And
then the other edge just came from the
height on that z-axis, the 2 * r. When
you multiply those together, you get
yourself that 4 pi r 2. So that's where
that formula comes from, or at least one
way of seeing where that formula comes
from. And then, like I said, if you're
at one row of this diagram, you can just
take derivatives and integrals to get
yourself up and down. So knowing the
surface area is enough to give you the
boundary on the inside. Now here's the
key question. This is a very clever
thing that Archimedes did. I don't know
if Archimedes ever took a moment to
think about four-dimensional balls or
fivedimensional balls. But if he ever
did, I have to imagine he might have
wondered, is there some way I could
generalize that really nice argument to
talk about the boundary of a
three-dimensional ball and how to
measure it? How do I generalize that?
And I want you to think about this for a
moment because this is really the crux
of everything we're going to talk about
today is taking this clever Archimedian
idea but somehow using it to let us take
rightward steps in our diagram. And what
I want to convince you of is that kind
of the right way to think about what
Archimedes was really doing is that he
was making a night's move in this might
sound a little bit weird. Let me
explain. So, it's a nice move where you
might think of it combined with that 2
pi r factor because if we think of that
unwrapped cylinder and we say where did
those two side lengths come from? We
were multiplying two amounts. Where did
they come from? One of them at the top
came from the boundary of a
two-dimensional ball. That is a circle.
That was your 2 pi r. And even though
initially it might just look like, oh,
that other side it was a line because it
started off as a line. I want to try to
convince you the right way to think
about that other side is that it's a
one-dimensional ball. It's the interior
of a one-dimensional ball. And here's
what I mean. So we're thinking about a
threedimensional sphere, right? What is
that? What does it mean to be on the
boundary of a threedimensional sphere?
Well, really in think in terms of
coordinates, it means you take three
numbers x, y, and z. And as long as the
sum of the squares of those numbers is
one, that's what it means to be on the
boundary of a sphere. Now, I could say,
suppose I ask you, hey, I would like you
to give me a point on the boundary of a
sphere. One way you could do that, it's
kind of a weird way, but one way you
could do it is to say, first I'm going
to choose my z value, and as long as z^2
is less than or equal to 1, I'm going to
be safe. That's going to give me enough
room to find an x^2 and a y^2. And then
after choosing a value for z, uh, you
have a circle worth of options for x^2
and y^2. It's going to be everything um,
such that the sum of those squares is 1
minus whatever z^ squ was. Now, usually
you couldn't use this kind of breakdown
to make a nice uh surface area
calculation because there's this
dependence where the the size of that
value Z is influencing the size of the
circle of options that remains. So, you
can't just take, you know, the the
length of that line on the Z-axis and
then multiply it by the size of that
circle because that circle is changing
size. And it's actually really not
obvious, even if you're savvy with
multivariable calculus and you want to
set this all up in sign way. It's really
not obvious how you can get those two
numbers to relate to each other. But the
core point of the Archimedian idea was
to basically say you don't have to do
that. Now before I draw that, actually I
I want to take the same diagram. We're
kind of moving the Z squ um and we're
letting that influence X and Y, but I
want to show the same animation in a way
that's going to generalize to the
four-dimensional case. So it's not going
to rely on me drawing that
threedimensional picture. Basically, as
you move Z farther away from zero, it
constricts that circle and you have this
dependence between what Z you happened
to choose and the circles worth of
options left over. Okay, so what did our
communities do? Basically, he said,
well, it's actually going to be the same
as if there was no dependence as if you
took those circles worth of options and
you just projected it out. So at all
different values of Z, it happened to be
a unit circle. Um that's what we mean by
a cylinder. If you are comfortable with
the language of set theory, you could
say that cylinder is a cartisian product
between the line segment and then the
circle. And the really nice thing about
taking a product like that where what's
happening on one of those sets is just
completely independent from the other
one is if you want to calculate the area
in this case, you can just multiply
those two numbers because of that
independence.
So that's what I mean by taking a
knight's move here is that if we're
taking that that interior of a
one-dimensional ball and each one is
kind of getting turned into a circle
projected out and because of this
Archimedian idea, it's independent
enough that we're safe to just multiply
those numbers. Now what's this going to
look like in four dimensions? Okay, so
we're going to give some notation here.
We could say the boundary of a
threedimensional ball looks like the
interior of a one-dimensional ball
[snorts] times the boundary of a
two-dimensional ball, just a circle.
Okay, I take that. Here's what it looks
like in four dimensions. We're going to
say the boundary of a four-dimensional
ball is going to look like multiplying
the area of the interior of a
two-dimensional ball by a circle again.
And again, let's think in terms of the
coordinates. Why does this make sense?
What do we mean by the boundary of a
four-dimensional ball? Well, we mean all
the points XYZ W got four coordinates
now where you add up their squares and
you equal one. One way you could think
to make a choice for such a point on
that uh boundary is to say first I'm
going to choose a z and a w and if
they're going to give me a valid option
all I need is that the sum of their
squares is less than equal to one. If
that's the case I'll be safe. I'll have
some choice for my x and y. And then
after that that leaves you with a
circles worth of options. Some x^2 + y^2
that would have to equal this thing that
depends on z and w. And initially that
would mean you can't just naively
multiply these because of that
dependence. So the equivalent of the
animation we had earlier would be
basically saying if the choice of Z and
W was farther away from the origin that
constricts the circles worth of options
you have left over. And in general it's
very non-trivial to use this kind of
relationship to somehow say how am I
going to figure out the the volume of
the boundary of this four-dimensional
ball using this breakdown. But the
clever thing is that that same
Archimedian idea where you take uh
various points with a constant ZV
valueue and you project them out onto a
cylinder, the same logic ends up
holding. But in this case, instead of a
constant ZV value, you'd be choosing
constant Z and W, but you still take
that XY's worth of options and project
them out onto something with radius one.
You'll still have the same effect where
that stretches things in one direction,
but it squishes things in another. And
the ratios work out that those perfectly
cancel each other out. And in terms of
what we have on screen here, what that
basically means is we can pretend like
there is no dependence on Z and W as far
as a volume calculation is concerned. We
can just take that interior of the
circle and then multiply it by the
boundary of the circle. And this is very
bizarre for me to think about because
the product of the interior of a circle
and a circle like this is going to be a
solid donut. So with whereas Archimedes
was projecting onto a cylinder, somehow
the four-dimensional version of
Archimedes would be imagining projecting
his hypersphere onto a donut that
encloses the sphere. I can't visualize
that either, but we can do the analysis
to say this must be what's going on. So
in our diagram, we're making another
night's move, but this time we're
shifting everything over. What is the
volume of the boundary of a
four-dimensional sphere? Well, we're
going to take that p<unk> r^ 2. We
multiply it by the 2 pi or 2 pi r
rather. And there we go. Evidently, that
volume looks like 2<unk>i^2 * r cubed.
This is kind of fun because we picked up
another factor of pi. Maybe you weren't
expecting that. And again, once you have
something in one column of this diagram,
you just take derivatives and integrals
to go up and down. So if we want to know
the volume, or rather the
four-dimensional equivalent of volume of
a hypersphere, you just take an integral
to go down. In this case, integrating r
cubed looks like turning it into an r
4th and then dividing by 4. So, as far
as the constant is concerned, what we've
done here is basically divided by four.
Again, that division is going to be very
important. And so, we end up with this
conclusion where evidently the volume of
a four-dimensional ball looks like 2 / 2
* r 4. Now, that's very pretty. It's
kind of a nice formula. And maybe you
don't believe me, right? Maybe you
think, I don't know, Grant, you're
pulling the wool over my eyes in some
way here. Like I don't know if that
Archimedian trick really necessarily
works. Maybe you're skeptical about the
integration step. But I want to
emphasize again this is not just we
claim it and we hand it down from on
high. This is an empirical question. If
you want to test whether this is true,
whether you've done your math right,
this is wouldn't be a proof, but you
could just go and run a simulation. You
can ask that probability question we had
at the start. Go type up some whatever
your favorite programming language is.
You have a choose four random numbers
between negative 1 and one. you add up
their squares and you just sample when
do and don't the sum of those squares
end up you know bigger or smaller than
one and what you'll find is the
numerical answer to that ends up lining
up very very closely the bigger your
simulation is with the the formula that
I just gave you that nice beautiful pi^2
/ two so that's fun and it's also
generalizable we could just keep going
we can make that same night's move if we
want to go up to the fifth dimension and
just to spell it all out what this is
going to end up looking like I won't do
this for every single one of them
because boy are we stretching what we
can even draw in pictures on the screen
now. But we're going to say the boundary
of a five-dimensional ball is in some
sense uh thought of as a product between
the interior of one and three
dimensions, a solid three-dimensional
ball and a circle. And what I actually
mean by that is if you choose a point on
that boundary, well, what we mean is
choosing five numbers where the sum of
the squares of those numbers is equal to
one. And you could think of that as
saying first I'm going to choose three
of those numbers and I'm safe to do that
as long as the sum of their squares is
less than one meaning point inside a
three-dimensional ball and I have a
circle's worth of options left. And this
is a a tongue-in-cheek equation. It's
not the case that the boundary of the
ball is literally like a product a
cartisian product between your interior
of a ball and a circle. But what I'm
saying is there's a a volume preserving
move that takes you from that boundary
of a five-dimensional ball onto the
thing that literally is that cartisian
product. So we might as well think of it
as being that as far as volume
calculations are concerned, which is
very fun. Now in terms of our diagram,
all that means is to make this knight's
move, you do the same thing. You
multiply by 2 pi r. And sometimes people
will ask like why are you staying
constant at that 2 pi r? Everything else
is moving over. Why does that one stay
fixed? And the basic idea is that when
you're making this Archimedian move
where you want to um project out, it's
important that you have two distinct
actions that are canceling each other
out. One that's stretching in one
direction and the other one which is
casting a shadow. So if you tried to
break down your choice of a point on the
boundary of some highdimensional sphere,
not as a a bunch of things and then two
more, but a bunch of things and you
know, three more or four more, uh you
wouldn't run into that same really nice
cancellation. So every time you make
this nice move in the diagram and then
you integrate to go down it gives us one
more column and again that integration
as far as the constant is concerned up
in five dimensions it just means
dividing by five that r fourth turns
into r 5th and you have that integration
factor dividing by five and we can just
keep this going on autopilot. Every time
you make one of these moves um getting
into that nice move looks like
multiplying by 2 pi r. So you kind of
have this 2 pi jump up and to the right
and then an integration factor to get
down and we just fill in the whole
diagram. And in some sense we're done,
right? In some sense this gives you the
rule that you could use to decide on the
volume of any dimensional sphere that
you want. But of course we want a nice
formula for this, right? We want to come
away with formula. We want to analyze
the formula. We want to think about what
it means. So let's take a moment to see
if we can write down what that should
be.
So the way I'm going to do this uh each
one of these volumes in higher
dimensions looks like some constant
times r to that number of dimensions.
Right? So for example in one dimension
that constant is two. In two dimensions
that constant is pi. In three dimensions
4/3 pi on and on and on. What we really
want to know is what is this constant?
And the key rule that we have is a
recursive one. It's saying if you want
to know that constant in some dimension,
look two dimensions earlier and it
should be the same as taking that but
multiplying by 2 pi and dividing by n.
And that's the formulaic way of
basically capturing this night's move
and integrate idea. You take a night's
move to get up and to the right that
multiplies you by 2 pi and then you
integrate to get down. That's going to
divide you by n. So if you have this
recurrence relation, it kind of tells
you everything you need to know. For
example, let's say uh couple months from
now, you find yourself in one of your
exams. For some unbeknownsted reason,
your exam asks, "What is the volume of
an eight-dimensional ball?" And you're
like, "Grant told me this, but I
forgot." Don't worry, it's okay if you
forget, cuz all you need to know if you
want to know the volume of an
eight-dimensional ball is the volume of
a sixdimensional ball. You take pi
divided by half the dimensions and then
multiply it by that. And you say, "Ah,
crap. I also forget the volume of a
sixdimensional ball. Not a worry. Not a
worry at all. All you have to remember
is the volume of a four-dimensional
ball. You take pi divided by half the
dimension. So in this case, half of six
would be three. Pi divided by half the
dimension. Multiply by that. And you're
like, well, now this is embarrassing
because I also forget the volume of a
four-dimensional ball. But not a worry.
You go down one more. You multiply by pi
/ the dimension. Now, at this point,
presumably you do know the volume of a
two-dimensional ball, which is to say
the area of a circle. But if you're a
programmer at heart and you're looking
at this,
right, and you're thinking, I'm defining
a recursive function. If you ever wrote
a recursive function, your base case was
at n equals 2. It would be very
embarrassing to submit that poll
request.
So looking at this diagram, it kind of
screams out to you, hang on a second,
maybe we should actually be venturing
farther back, even though I know the
area of a circle. Like should I be going
one further? Should I have a base case
at zero? [laughter] And I mentioned one
dimension was unloved, but like poor
zero dimensions. We didn't even think
about zero dimensional geometry and say,
okay, what would this mean? Well, in
terms of the formulas, we know what it
wants us to be saying if we want this
recurrence relation to be true. The
volume of a uh a zero dimensional unit
ball should be one. And we're like, hang
on, where are we? Zero dimensions. Can't
move left. Can't move up. Can't I can't
move anywhere. Just a point. So, a unit
ball is everything, I guess. And the
volume of everything is one. Seems
reasonable. What's the boundary of a
unit ball? You're like, the boundary of
everything, I guess, would be nothing.
So, zero, which I guess makes sense. And
I I actually once gave this talk at
Stanford and you know how at the end of
talks like people come up for Q&As's and
there's always the annoying person who
doesn't understand the Q part of Q&A and
they're like I have a thing to say. So
someone comes up he's like I have three
points I want to say. It was okay though
cuz this person was Donald Ko and he was
like
it was like in the zero dimensional case
you can still write the program to
verify the answer because you just
choose zero numbers and ask the
probability that the sum of their
squares is less than one and it's
probability one. I was like, "Ah,
touché, Donald can. Thanks."
So, point is, we've got this uh answer
to our eight dimensional question, but
it's not hard to see how it generalizes.
We were playing this little hopscotching
game going back, and you're basically
multiplying pi in the numerator by half
the dimensions number of times. And then
that denominator, because we were always
dividing by that half dimension, it's
just a factorial. So, in this specific
example, it's four factorial, but more
generally, it's half the number of
dimensions factorial. And so we can
clean things up. We take that constant,
like I was saying, it's multiplied by an
R to the n. And I can tell you,
wonderful, we can use this. It lets you
kind of hopscotch two dimensions up if
you think of it as a recurrence. But you
can also just zero shot your way into
whatever you want. If we're going to ask
this for, say, 100 dimensions. And I
say, what a beautiful formula. As
promised, we have a beautiful formula.
And you might say, well, hang on a
second. You're not done. Because there's
something kind of awkward about this
formula, which is what's going on at all
the odd numbers. because the denominator
is asking us to take something like half
factorial or three halves factorial or
five halves factorial which feels kind
of weird but we shouldn't have a rule
that's different for the odd number
dimensions because in terms of all the
logic that we were applying with this
night's move and integrate nothing about
that logic was telling us hey only do
this for an even number of dimensions.
So we we kind of want in our souls for
this to be something that applies to
everything because the recurrence rule
applies to everything, right? Like if
you forgot the volume of a
seven-dimensional ball and it's a
crucial fact that comes up on your
homework for some godforsaken reason,
you could still find your way up to it,
right? You play this game where you keep
multiplying by uh pi / half the
dimension. And actually in this case, I
think it's kind of nicer to to put that
two back up in the numerator. So if you
wanted to think about what is it that
takes us from say a one-dimensional ball
up to a three-dimensional ball, you're
multiplying that 2 pi and then you're
dividing by three. And so like maybe
next time you look at the volume of a
sphere, you can think about it as
saying, hm, actually it is a
one-dimensional ball, but we did that
nice move which was 2 pi and divided by
3 and that's what gets you that that 4/3
pi factor. But you could keep going from
there to get up to five. You multiply by
another 2 pi and divide by 5. Multiply
by another 2 pi from there, divide by 7.
And if you had been looking at those
oddnumbered cases and thinking that the
numbers were very ugly, like for
example, we have this, you know, 945 in
one of the denominators and initially
you see that you're like, where did that
number come from? Here it's actually
nice to think about. It's like a
factorial, but just where you do all the
odd numbers. That's 9 * 7 * 5 * 3. And
then the numerator always looks like a
power of 2 * a power of pi. But if we
wanted this to all be true for our
general formula, right, we don't want to
have one rule that we write for the even
case, one rule that we write for the odd
case, like I don't know, Thanksgiving
with divorced parents or something where
you have to make a choice. It's nice if
our parents get back together, right?
Like let's uh let let's think about what
would be required for this to make
sense. And in this case, the marriage
counselor just suggests looking at the
n=1 case and asking what has to be true
there. So what this formula would say
for n= 1 would be that the volume of a
one-dimensional ball which again is just
a line segment looks like pi half pi to
the 1/2 and raising to the 1/2 is the
same as taking a square root / 1/2
factorial whatever the heck that should
be times r. But we do a little
arrangement and we say well this is kind
of telling us what 1/2 factorial would
have to be if you know mom and dad are
getting back together. it would have to
be square<unk> of pi / two. And once you
have that, you actually have the rest of
them because if you think about
factorials again in a recursive way,
what what should it mean? Like n
factorial recursively is defined to be n
* whatever n minus one factorial is. So
what is three halves factorial? Well,
it's going to be three halves times
whatever 1/2 factorial is, which we're
saying should be<unk> of pi / 2. What's
5 half factorials? Well, five halves
times three halves times whatever 1/2
factorial should be. So basically, if we
take this one suggestion from the
mathematical universe that 1/2 factorial
should be<unk> of pi / 2, our whole
formula works out. And what's reassuring
here, some of you might actually know
that there is a way to generalize the
factorial. Um, it doesn't just
generalize to half integers. It's based
on something called the gamma function.
It generalizes it to real numbers, uh,
to complex numbers. And if this was a
much longer lecture, we could have a
whole other discussion about the gamma
function and how there's a completely
parallel path that you could use to
derive the volumes of higher dimensional
spheres that comes from basically
studying Gaussian distributions in high
dimensions where if you want to
integrate them and understand what it
looks like to integrate a Gaussian
function, there's a certain trick that
you can apply and that trick will give
you a formula for the higher dimensional
spheres in terms of the gamma function.
And what that ends up telling us is the
the way that we want to extend our
factorial definition, which is kind of
like forcing this formula to be true, it
actually does align with the way that it
gets generalized even more broadly in a
different corner of math.
Now, in addition to just having a
beautiful formula to gawk at
symbolically, I want to take a moment to
look at the actual numbers behind it and
plug in some amounts and see if we can
interpret what's going on because
something very strange actually happens
when you do that. So, let's think about
this. I'm going to draw the volume of a
unit ball in all of our dimensions. So,
starting with zero dimensions, no longer
does zero dimension get no love. We're
going to give it the love it deserves.
That constant is one. In one dimension,
the constant the volume of a unit ball
is two. In two dimensions, uh it's pi,
just area of a of a unit circle. In
three dimensions, it's 4/3 pi. And all
these numbers are going up. You might be
like, yeah, of course they're going up
because each sphere in one dimension
like contains the smaller one. So, it's
getting bigger. uh they should be
getting bigger. Up in four dimensions,
it gets bigger still. We end up around
4.93. Five dimensions is bigger still,
but it's kind of slowing down, which
might give us pause. Then it gets very
worrying because at six dimensions it's
smaller. Like that's weird. Seven is
smaller, eight is smaller, 9 is smaller.
Still, it starts decreasing very
rapidly. We're like, hang on a second.
Up in, for example, 10 dimensions,
that's actually smaller than the
two-dimensional ball. And that's that's
a little strange to interpret to say the
least. And so if you draw the curve for
this where we're going to fill it in not
just for integers but but for everything
using the gamma function, here's what it
looks like. And let's think about why,
right? Like why does it turn around? Why
does it turn around at five? That's kind
of weird. What's special about five
dimensions? Um and then what happens as
we go out towards an even higher number
of dimensions? And the nice thing about
the fact that you and I have landed here
not because I just gave you the formula
and said trust me that it's true but
because you see where it comes from is
we can think about these questions in
terms of where it came from. Ultimately
it's it's rooted in this recurrence
relation where understanding what
happens in one dimension you look two
dimensions earlier and then you do that
nice move that takes you 2 pi and then
you do an integration which gives you
that division by n. So every time we're
stepping two units to the right in this
diagram, you're multiplying 2 pi / n,
where n is kind of the x coordinate of
where you land. So for example, jumping
from 1 up to 3, that's 2 pi/3. 2 pi is
bigger than three, so that's why you're
growing. From 2 up to 4, you multiply by
2 pi over 4. 2 pi is bigger than four,
so you're still growing. 2 pi is bigger
than five, not by as much, so you're not
growing as much. From four to six, 2 pi
is bigger than six, but now just barely.
And then it's at that point that it
turns around where as you go from five
up to 7, you're taking 2 pi / 7, but now
the denominator is starting to win out.
And in fact, it starts to win out by
more and more and more because as you
get into a higher dimension, that
integration factor is big playing a
bigger and bigger role and it starts to
dominate. So if you wanted to ask why
was five the biggest basically because
at that value of n where the numerator
denominator are as close as they can be
when it's equal to six that's straddling
this number five and so that's the point
at which the change on this graph um is
going to be around zero. So if we keep
going though, what what ends up being
very surprising and I think this is one
of those just genuinely baffling facts
about higher higher dimensions is that
your unit balls, they don't just get
small, they get downright infantal. For
example, let's take a 100dimensional
ball using our formula. It looks like pi
to the 50. Cool. That's big. Nice big
number. But divided by 50 factorial,
which is way bigger, right? because all
of those factors of pi in the numerator
on average are much much smaller than
the terms that you're multiplying in the
denominator. Almost all of them are much
bigger than pi. Numerically this is
around 2.37 * 10 -40th. So a ball in 100
dimensions it's nothing. It's just
absolutely nothing. And this again is an
empirical fact. That question I asked at
the very beginning I said imagine you
choose a 100 different random numbers
each between negative 1 and one. You
square them. You want to know the
probability that the sum of those
squares is less than one. Now, on the
one hand, you could say, well, it's it's
very expected that this should be a
small number, right? Because think about
the coincidence that's required here.
All 100 of your numbers have to happen
to be so small that when you add up all
those squares, you end up less than one.
And I'd say, I agree, that's surprising.
I would have thought that smallalness is
taken into account by that 2 to the 100
in the denominator. I would look at it
and be like, well, there's the source of
your smallness. The thing that's
surprising here is that it's not just
the denominator that makes it small, but
the numerator is also working against
you. That numerator is a puny number as
well. This volume of higher dimensional
spheres being very small and downright
negligible. It actually comes up a lot.
You know, people who study machine
learning, they have to think about
quirks in higher dimensions. This is one
of them. Your balls are just puny.
Cryptographers, same deal. Well, you
don't clap. you can't clap for that.
There's a time for clapping and that's
not it.
Um,
uh, if you study cryptography, this fact
comes up a lot as well. Quantum
mechanics comes up as well. And I think
it's worth just a little moment to
divert all of your attention away from
the concept of puny balls and instead on
the question of like why where did that
come from? And really what's happening
here is the the integration factor,
right? when when you're dividing by that
n, for example, when you're thinking
about the volume of a threedimensional
ball, you're kind of adding together all
of these shells, you're integrating
together all these things that are
proportional to r 2 and we're saying
that that effectively gives you this 1/3
factor. It's very similar actually if
you have, let's say, like a square
pyramid and you think of it as being
built up from a whole bunch of squares
whose side lengths are increasing
linearly. You know how with a pyramid it
looks like 1/3 time its base uh times
the height. Basically the same thing is
going on here where that that's where
the 1/3 comes from. And in general when
you're doing this in a higher number of
dimensions that factor is getting bigger
and bigger. And this actually relates to
a distinct fact about higher dimensional
spheres which is also relevant in all of
these fields if you want to get a little
bit of an intuition for how how
distances behave. This has to do with
not just what the volume of a sphere is
but where that volume is. And it's
basically almost all right next to the
boundary. And it's not too hard to
explain why. So let's say we're in two
dimensions and I want to understand how
much of the area of that circle, let's
say it's a unit circle, is within a
distance of like 0.01 of the boundary.
It's kind of within 1% of the boundary.
Well, you could calculate that is you
could say, all right, the area of the
entire circle is p<unk> r^ squ. And then
if we chop out everything other than
that boundary, that would be another
circle, but whose radius was scaled down
by 99%.
And if you scale that down by 99%.
The area gets scaled down by its square
which is approximately 0.98 in this case
0.9801.
But the idea is that 2% of the of the
area of that circle is close to the
boundary. But circles are actually very
unusual in this respect in the scope of
all of the possible spheres across all
the dimensions because let's think about
what this would be in like some really
big like 10,000 dimensions. Okay, so we
know the volume. It's fun. We have a
formula for it. It's not really the
point here though. If you wanted to play
the same game of saying how much of the
volume is right next to the boundary,
you could take the entire ball and then
you say, let's scale it down by 99%. And
then ask what's the volume of that that
smaller one that initially you might
think is only slightly smaller. But in
this case, when you scale it down, it's
not just getting scaled down in two
directions. By definition of what we
mean being in 10,000 dimensions, it's
getting scaled down in 10,000 different
directions. So the factor by which its
volume decreases looks like 0.99 raised
to the 10,000 that is effectively zero.
It's 2 * 10 - 44. So this is saying
essentially all of the volume is sitting
right there on that boundary. And this
is related to what we were just looking
at where as you're going from the
boundary to the interior, you're making
this division that becomes more and more
significant. Uh because if you think
about it, what does it mean when we're
talking about the surface area of a
sphere of a unit sphere is 4 pi, a
number that's uh you know around 12 and
the interior of it is 4/3 pi. On the one
hand, you're comparing different units.
One is an area, one's a volume, but you
could say you take that area and you
multiply it just by a tiny little amount
and it's giving you like a
disproportionate amount of the entire
sphere. So that's actually a nice
intuition to have just if you are
working with highdimensional data.
Essentially everything if you're dealing
with uh something inside a ball is just
right next to the surface effectively
right on the surface. While we're here
there's there's another fact this is
kind of tied to where let's say you want
to know on that boundary where is most
of that boundary volume for example most
of the the surface area of a sphere. Now
in a sphere it's nicely distributed
across everything but if this picture
was being drawn in many many many more
dimensions what ends up happening is
almost all the masses at the equator and
the reason is tied to what we were just
talking about where as you scale it a
little bit because there's so many
dimensions to scale in it basically
disappears. So if you think of the
circles that aren't the equator and I
say circle the uh you know the the
dminus 2dimensional boundaries that
aren't the equator but are just a little
bit up forward or just a little bit down
from it. those ones end up becoming
effectively nothing because that tiny
bit of scaling that's required to get
just a little up or just a little down
essentially makes their volume
disappear.
Now the last thing I want to linger on
is how like this idea that the size of
your uh of your spheres in higher
dimensions is shrinking feels a little
bit like it feels like it's not even a
sensible comparison because we're
messing with different units, right?
Like what does it mean to compare the
volume of a one-dimensional ball to that
of a two-dimensional ball to a
threedimensional one? because one is a
length, one is an area, one is a volume.
Because in some some literal sense, like
a threedimensional ball is not smaller
or bigger than the four-dimensional
ball. It's just incomparable. And so
let's try to think about what this
number actually means. How can we give
kind of a unit-free interpretation of
it? And in a literal sense, I guess what
we're saying is we're really comparing
it to the volume of a unit cube. You
know that pi for the area of a unit
circle. That's basically area of a
circle as compared to the area of a of a
square with side length one. And then
three dimensions. What do we mean by
that 4/3 pi? Well, we're comparing the
volume of that sphere to the volume of a
unit cube. And so in some sense, the
fact that this is getting smaller is
really just telling you that up in many
dimensions, the the size of a cube
compared to the size of a sphere ends up
getting really really disproportionate.
The cubes are huge and the spheres are
small. And that I was thinking actually
that reminds me of that earlier puzzle.
And in fact, there's a different visual
that you can think of for what this
number is really telling you because
let's pull up that second puzzle that we
looked at where we had all these uh
corner spheres. What if I wanted to ask
how much of this diagram is represented
in those corner spheres versus in that
cube? And in this case, there's eight
distinct corner spheres and each one of
them has radius 1. And then the cube is
a 2x2x2 cube. So you'd be taking 8 times
the volume of a unit sphere and you're
dividing it by 8. So that's just getting
us back to where we are because that
that factor of 8 cancels out. Whatever
this picture looks like up in 100
dimensions, you've got 2 to the 100
corner spheres and then you've got this
big old cube that's volume 2 to the 100.
Those cancel out. And the fact that a
100dimensional sphere is very small
could be interpreted as saying whatever
this diagram should be up in 100
dimensions, those corner spheres are
basically none of it. they're
effectively none of the volume that
you're looking at. And that kind of ties
to the the visual I was giving earlier
where the very loose huristic for this
highdimensional cube is that it's super
spiky. It's something where the distance
to the edge is much much smaller than
the distance to the corner. And so all
those corner spheres are basically none
of your diagram.
And so with all that, I just want to end
you with you on a very small note, which
is that there's a lot of beautiful items
that you can come across in math, but
actually recognizing that beauty
sometimes requires looking at something
that was very familiar, whether that's
the factorial or area of a circle and
then putting it in the context of
something more general. The beauty that
underlies factorials and the beauty that
underlies the volume formula for a
sphere is actually only visible once
you've stepped back to see things
general enough. Otherwise, it would not
at all be visible that a pi is secretly
hiding inside your your factorial
calculations or that there's some
unifying formula sitting between your
area of a circle and your volume of a
sphere. So, that's all I have for you. I
want to end it here. Thank you everyone
for coming.
[applause]
Hi there, me again, but from the office
this time. I wanted to chime in with a
quick little end note partly to talk
about that very first animation I showed
at the beginning and explain what that
actually is, how it relates to
highdimensional spheres. But before
then, given that you are demonstrabably
the kind of person who watches a lecture
about highdimensional spheres, I have a
suspicion that you would be a good fit
for the new experimental thing I'm doing
this year, which is essentially a
virtual career fair. So, take a moment
to go to 3b1b.co/talent.
And there what you'll find is a set of
career opportunities from various
different organizations who are
interested in people like you, the kind
of people who watch these videos and the
curiosity that represents which tends to
correlate with very technically talented
people. So for every group that you find
there, I've personally taken a chance to
chat with the teams there and I can tell
you the people that I've met there are
just clearly very smart. They're very
curious in the sense of truth seeeking.
A lot of them are just high agency
people. They clearly take charge of what
they actually do. They don't just wait
to follow instructions. And if that
sounds like the kind of person who you
want to work alongside, I would highly
encourage you to at least check it out.
Listen to some of the interviews I
conducted with the people there. And if
you're looking for a new career,
hopefully this gives you a helpful new
batch of considerations. Since the last
video when I very first mentioned this,
there have been actual hires made, which
is pretty cool to me. So, who knows?
Maybe if you go and explore the page,
you'll be the next one. All right. So
for that animation at the very very
beginning I initially showed this circle
that turns into the various lines of
latitude on a sphere a sphere in three
dimensions and our minds are very good
at seeing that it's a three-dimensional
sphere. After that I basically show the
same thing same code but stepping it up
in one dimension. So I represent all of
the spheres of latitude on a
four-dimensional sphere. So they're kind
of a bunch of four tupils of numbers.
But if you change the perspective on
that before you project down into three
dimensions, you get all of these
different views of what those spheres of
latitude end up looking like, which as
you rotate that hypersphere ends up
looking just very trippy. And you know,
I don't think this is explanatory in the
sense of you look at this and you see ah
p<unk>^2 over 2, but it is very fun. So
thought I'd share that with you. Also,
if you want to see a fun application of
this formula for highdimensional sphere
volumes, you might enjoy a video I did
with number file a couple years back
that includes a puzzle that incorporates
this into its answer.
[music]
>> [music]